JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the
"NewsHour"e tonight:
Donald Trump doubles down on his
claim President
Obama and Hillary Clinton
founded ISIS, as
Clinton lays out her vision for
America's
economy.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Thursday: The
Afghan army loses ground to
Taliban insurgents,
tightening their grip on
Afghanistan's key
Helmand Province.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And how New York
City turned
an abandoned railroad track into
a beautiful
park, drawing millions of
visitors.
JAMES CORNER, Landscape
Architect: They see
this.
They have discovered a found
object.
There's a sense of surprise, a
sense of delight.
It's real and authentic.
It's not Disney.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: From terrorism to
taxes, the candidates
duel today over their visions of
each other.
Hillary Clinton talked economic
policy.
And Donald Trump repeatedly
claimed that her
failures in the Obama
administration allowed
a deadly new enemy to emerge.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Oh, boy, is ISIS hoping for her.
GWEN IFILL: Trump is stepping up
his effort
to tie Hillary Clinton time as
secretary of
state to the rise of the Islamic
State.
This morning, in Miami:
DONALD TRUMP: You know, if
you're a sports
team, most valuable player, MVP.
You get the MVP award.
ISIS will hand her the most
valuable player
award.
GWEN IFILL: And last night in
Fort Lauderdale,
with this about President Obama:
DONALD TRUMP: ISIS is honoring
President Obama.
He is the founder of ISIS.
He's the founder.
And I would say the co-founder
would be crooked
Hillary Clinton.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: The Republican
nominee defended
the line of attack in a call-in
today to CNBC.
DONALD TRUMP: There is something
wrong with
saying that?
Why?
Are people complaining that I
said he was
the founder of ISIS?
QUESTION: I am wondering how you
think that's
going to play in some
battleground states.
DONALD TRUMP: I don't know.
Whatever it is, it is.
GWEN IFILL: The Clinton campaign
dismissed
it all as trash-talking, and
said: "It goes
without saying that this is a
false claim.
He's echoing the talking points
of Vladimir
Putin and our adversaries to
attack American
leaders and American interests."
On the campaign trail, Clinton
ripped into
Trump's economic policies in a
speech outside
Detroit.
She charged he's outright scared
of free trade,
and likened it to the Olympics.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
If Team USA was as fearful as
Trump, Michael
Phelps and Simone Biles would be
cowering
in the locker room afraid to
come out to compete.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Instead,
they are
winning gold medals.
America isn't afraid to compete.
GWEN IFILL: Clinton went on to
cite a litany
of issues that she said Trump
remains silent
on.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: He has
offered no
credible plans to address what
working families
up against today, nothing on
student loans
or the cost of prescription
drugs, nothing
for communities of color in our
cities to
overcome the barriers of
systemic racism,
nothing to create new
opportunities for young
people.
GWEN IFILL: But even as Clinton
surges in
the polls, there's new worry for
Democrats
about a cyber-attack blamed on
Russian hackers.
The New York Times reports they
breached e-mail
accounts of more than 100 party
officials
and groups.
That's on top of hacking of the
Democratic
National Committee and the
party's House campaign
committee.
DNC Chair Debbie Wasserman
Schultz was forced
to step down when that news came
to light
on the eve of the party
convention.
House Minority Leader Nancy
Pelosi addressed
the issue in Washington today:
REP.
NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), House
Minority Leader:
Russians broke in.
Who did they give the
information to?
I don't know.
Who dumped it?
But I do know that this is a
Watergate-like
electronic break-in.
GWEN IFILL: Pelosi said she
doesn't know whether
her own e-mails were targeted.
And it's equally unclear what
revelations
may yet be coming from the
hackers.
We will turn to the candidates'
competing
proposals on the economy after
the news summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: American-backed
militias claimed new progress in
capturing
the Islamic State's last
stronghold in Libya.
The militia forces say they have
now liberated
70 percent of the city of Sirte.
Just a day earlier, they took
control of several
key sites there, including a
sprawling convention
center that ISIS fighters had
used as a headquarters.
GWEN IFILL: Australia is
accusing asylum-seekers
of lying about sexual abuse in
offshore detention
camps.
More than 2,000 incidents
allegedly happened
on the island nation of Nauru.
But Australia's immigration
minister rejected
the accounts today.
PETER DUTTON, Australian
Immigration Minister:
I would just add a word of
caution to some
of the hype that's out there at
the moment.
If people have done the wrong
thing, whether
it's security guards, whether
it's people
in our employ directly or
elsewhere, then
there's a price to pay for that.
But bear in mind that some
people do have
a motivation to make a false
complaint, and
we have had instances where
people have self-harmed
in an effort to get to
Australia, and I'm
not going to tolerate that
behavior either.
GWEN IFILL: Australia refuses to
accept asylum-seekers
trying to reach its shores by
boat.
It pays Nauru and Papua New
Guinea to hold
them instead.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the
Philippines, startling
numbers today from a crackdown
on drugs.
It began under new President
Rodrigo Duterte
as of July 1.
Since then, police report
killing 525 suspected
dealers who they say put up a
fight.
In addition, they have arrested
more than
7,600 suspects on charges of
drug dealing.
And another half-a-million
people have turned
themselves in to authorities.
Human rights advocates are
protesting the
killings.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, the U.S.
Drug Enforcement Administration
balked at
reclassifying marijuana as a
lesser drug.
Instead, it stays on the list of
the most
dangerous alongside heroin and
ecstasy.
There's a growing push to
legalize pot.
But the DEA said it still has a
high potential
for abuse.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The scientists
who found lead
contamination in Flint,
Michigan's water now
say the problem has greatly
improved.
A team from Virginia Tech
University tested
162 homes in July and reported
that 45 percent
had no detectable levels of
lead.
That is up from just 9 percent
with no lead
a year ago.
MARC EDWARDS, Virginia Tech
University: This
really shows that the corrosion
control and
all the things that are being
implemented
by the feds and state and city
are really
working, and Flint's system is
on its way
to recover.
Now, that doesn't mean the
current situation
is acceptable.
But this process of healing is
going to continue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For now, however,
the researchers
say all Flint residents should
continue to
drink bottled or filtered water.
GWEN IFILL: On Wall Street,
stocks followed
oil prices higher after an
international report
forecast greater stability in
the oil market.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained nearly
118 points to close at 18613.
The Nasdaq rose close to 24
points, and the
S&P 500 added 10.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And at the Summer
Olympic Games,
Americans finished one-two in
the women's
gymnastics individual
all-around.
Simone Biles cemented her place
as the best
in the world, taking gold, and
Aly Raisman
was right behind her to grab
silver.
Also today, American Kayla
Harrison successfully
defended her Olympic judo title
from 2012.
GWEN IFILL: Still to come on the
"NewsHour":
how the presidential candidates'
tax plans
could affect your budget; a
major setback
for Afghan security forces in
Helmand Province;
the new normal of slow economic
growth; and
much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Few things are
certain in life,
and this year's presidential
campaign has
certainly defied tradition.
But when it comes to taxes, it's
become clear
there are pretty big differences
between the
two major party candidates.
Lisa Desjardins reports.
It's part of our ongoing look at
issues shaping
this election.
LISA DESJARDINS: Taxes, among
the most powerful
of government policies,
affecting how we live
and work every day.
This week starts the first
head-to-head policy
speeches between Hillary Clinton
and Donald
Trump, starting with Trump
Monday.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I am proposing an
across-the-board income
tax reduction, especially for
middle-income
Americans.
LISA DESJARDINS: Trump's plan?
He would simplify the tax system
to just three
smaller rates and fewer
deductions.
His top rate would be 33 percent
vs. the current
39.6 percent.
We don't yet know who would see
which rates.
He's more specific on the estate
tax.
That's the tax on inheritances
over $5.4 million.
Trump would eliminate that tax
altogether,
a big benefit for farmers and
wealthy families.
Republicans say it is fair and
positive.
Hillary Clinton, in her economic
speech in
Michigan today, could not have
disagreed more.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Multimillionaires shouldn't be
able to pay
a lower tax rate than their
secretaries.
(APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton would
charge a minimum
30 percent tax on incomes over a
million dollars,
and she'd raise the total tax
rate to 43.6
percent for those making over $5
million.
Clinton wouldn't change rates
for the lower
or middle classes.
Clinton charges that Trump's tax
plan is a
giveaway to the wealthy,
especially one big
change.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: In his
speech on Monday,
he called for a new tax loophole
-- let's
call it the Trump loophole --
because it would
allow him to pay less than half
the current
tax rate on income from many of
his companies.
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton is
talking about
something complicated, but
important, called
pass-through income.
Here's how it works.
Classically, a business pays a
35 percent
rate on taxable incomes.
But some businesses, where the
owner or family
is the business -- think about
attorneys with
their own firms, for example --
can pay using
what's called a pass-through.
In that case, the business
doesn't pay a corporate
tax.
Instead, the company pays the
owner and the
owner pays an individual income
tax of up
to 39.6 percent.
This exists so the owner isn't
taxed twice,
as a business and individual.
Donald Trump's plan would cut
all corporate
taxes to 15 percent.
And he would set a new 15
percent rate for
these pass-through incomes, a
huge cut that
could apply to his own
businesses.
He responds that Clinton and
Democrats overtax
companies.
DONALD TRUMP: All Hillary
Clinton has to offer
is more of the same, more taxes,
more regulations,
more bureaucrats, more
restrictions on American
energy and on American
production.
LISA DESJARDINS: Different
visions, Trump
offering tax cuts to all,
especially the wealthy,
Clinton pledging to tax the
wealthy more and
to use that money for programs
for the middle
and lower classes, including
targeted tax
credits.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clearly, there
are still many
other details to both of their
plans, but
let's focus in on some of the
bigger differences
of their approaches to taxes
with Neil Irwin.
He reports on business and
economic issues
for The New York Times.
And David Wessel, director of
the Hutchins
Center on Fiscal and Monetary
Policy at the
Brookings Institution, and a
contributing
correspondent for The Wall
Street Journal.
And we welcome both of you back
to the program.
So, I think both of you agree
with what we
have just been hearing.
The biggest differences between
Clinton and
Trump are over how their tax
plans treat the
wealthy.
David, spell that out a little
more for us.
What's the difference?
DAVID WESSEL, The Wall Street
Journal: Well,
Hillary Clinton has a very clear
strategy
of increasing taxes on the
wealthy.
She would increase the estate
tax.
She would increase, as Lisa's
piece said,
the marginal income tax rate on
the highest
income earners.
Trump, on the other hand, would
lower taxes
for pretty much everybody, but
he would disproportionately
lower them for people at the
top.
And he would do away with the
estate tax.
So, in a sense, she wants to use
the tax code
to narrow the gap between
winners and losers
in our economy, and he doesn't
make that a
priority.
He wants to lower taxes and says
that that
will somehow unleash a burst of
economy growth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Neil, remind
us, how do
we define wealthy here?
What income levels are we
talking about?
NEIL IRWIN, The New York Times:
Well, with
Hillary Clinton, the biggest
surcharge is
for people making over $5
million a year.
That's the very, very wealthy.
But she has some other
provisions that affect
people a little further down the
income scale,
some provisions that make sure
people making
over $1 million pay at least 30
percent.
That includes -- so that deals
with the issue
that Warren Buffett has talked
about where
some secretaries, middle-class
people can
end up with effectively a higher
rate than
people who make their income
through capital
gains.
So, it's kind of a multitiered
effort she's
doing to use some different
dials within the
tax code to try and shift
overall the burden
a little heavier toward the
affluent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, in
connection with that,
David, let's talk about what the
two of them
would do when it comes to
corporations and
businesses.
And I know there's a lot here,
you know, we
could focus on.
But, mainly, what are the
differences between
the two?
DAVID WESSEL: Well, the main
difference is
that Donald Trump wants to cut
the tax on
businesses, and she doesn't.
It's pretty simple like that.
She has a number of targeted tax
breaks for
businesses to encourage them to
do things
that she and her advisers think
would be good
for the economy, more
apprenticeships, more
profit-sharing.
But he is willing to cut the
rate, allow them
to write off a lot more stuff
more quickly.
Now, one advantage he has, he
doesn't pay
for any of this stuff.
So she's very carefully, you
increase this,
you cut that.
She's not making the long-term
deficit better,
but she's not making it worse.
He seems unconcerned with that,
so he can
give a lot more tax breaks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, revenue
overall to the
Treasury, to the government
would go down
under his proposal?
DAVID WESSEL: A lot, yes,
trillions of dollars.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Neil, be a little
bit more
specific on that, Neil, because
we have talked
about -- Lisa referred to
something called
the pass-through, where if
somebody owns a
business, they -- again, without
confusing
everybody, what does that
really, effectively
mean?
NEIL IRWIN: It's kind of a big
deal.
Donald Trump talks about doing a
15 percent
rate on business income, not
just corporations
like Apple or GE, but also on
small businesses,
including partnerships,
including if I have
a sole proprietorship, if I have
a small partnership,
he wants a 15 percent rate on
that income
as well, which means it creates
great incentive
-- if you're a wealthy person
looking at a
40 percent rate in the current
tax code, 33
percent under Trump's plan, you
can actually
get that down to 15 percent if
you can somehow
route that income through a
business, through
a partnership.
And what we will see if that
happens is a
lot of people trying to do that.
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
So what's interesting is if
you're a wage-earner,
if you get a paycheck from your
boss, there's
no way you're going to be able
to take advantage
of this.
But if you can somehow turn
yourself into
a little company, a lawyer who
is a partner,
or you're some kind of a
baseball player who
says, I'm now I'm -- I'm David
Wessel, Incorporated,
then I can take advantage of
this.
So a whole set of people, if
they can organize
themselves as businesses, can
take advantage
of this.
Ordinary wage-earners can't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And is it
expected that that
would happen, Neil?
NEIL IRWIN: It is.
The government -- the law can
try and do things
to try and fight it.
But we already see some of this
that happens
to avoid payroll taxes.
It is clearly one of the issues
that will
have to be resolved.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In connection
with this, we
often hear Donald Trump talk
about corporate
tax rates are way too high in
this country.
The effective rate, though,
David, as I understand
it, is lower than what the
number is.
People end up paying less, or
companies end
up paying less than what they
are charged
on paper.
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
So, the statutory rate, the rate
in the law
is 35 percent, but when you look
at all the
deductions and credits and
exclusions that
we give businesses, the
effective rate, on
average, is much lower than
that, in the 20s.
For some companies, it's higher.
Some companies, it is lower.
So, there is a lot of momentum
in Washington
to redo the corporate tax code,
take away
some of these deductions and
credits, and
lower the rates.
It's been very politically
difficult because
there are winners and losers.
And actually neither candidate
has gotten
very specific about how they do
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I want to
ask you both
about the middle class, people
earning less
than what the wealthy do.
But before we do, Neil, what
about changes
in the estate tax?
This is the tax people are
charged when they
die.
They pass on everything they
have to their
children and there's a tax
associated with
that.
How do Clinton and Trump deal
with that?
NEIL IRWIN: Well, with Trump,
it's simple.
He wants to get rid of it
entirely.
And one thing to remember, right
now, the
cutoff there for a married
couple, it's $10.9
million, meaning you have to be
a multimillionaire
when a person dies to face that
tax at all.
He still wants to get rid of it.
Hillary Clinton wants to go the
other direction,
reduce those exemptions down to
$7 million
for a married couple.
So it would affect more people
than it does
now if Hillary Clinton got her
way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, again, what
would the
effect be on revenue, David?
DAVID WESSEL: Well, we don't get
a lot of
revenue from the estate tax.
We know the direction.
But I think what Neil says is
really important.
So, of every 1,000 people who
die in a given
year, only two of them face the
estate tax.
So, it affects only the very
rich.
It's almost more of a talking
point than it
is a real tax policy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We often hear
Republicans refer
to it as the death tax.
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
Right.
I don't why they do that.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's talk about,
Neil, the
middle class, and let's be clear
about what
bracket, what income bracket
we're talking
about, because, again, we see
differences
between the two of them and what
they would
do with the tax rates.
NEIL IRWIN: Yes.
So, Donald Trump does have a
middle-class
tax cut.
It's fairly small.
It's moving one of the key
brackets from 15
percent to 12 percent.
One estimate, the proposal his
is based on
would cut after tax income for
middle-class
families by something like 0.2
percent, something
like 5 percent for the richest 1
percent.
So, he does have that tax cut in
there.
Hillary doesn't.
The question, though, is, is the
scale that
they're talking about something
that is going
to really move the dial and
change living
standards for middle-class
Americans?
And the numbers just aren't that
big.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we should
say, David, that
Trump has been saying the last
several days
that Clinton favors raising
taxes on the middle
class.
She says absolutely she does
not.
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
In her -- in the proposals she
has laid out,
she doesn't raise taxes on the
middle class.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, how do you
single out the
differences there on what
happens to the middle
class?
DAVID WESSEL: Well, as I said,
because Trump
is cutting taxes for a lot of
people and not
paying for it, he's able to
offer some tax
cuts, like the one Neil
described.
Hillary Clinton has some
targeted tax cuts,
like increasing the tax break
for child care,
which she has now responded to
in a vague
and evolving way.
I think, when you step back,
what Hillary
Clinton is really saying is,
look, some people
are going to have to pay more
taxes.
I'm going to come up with a plan
that puts
all those tax increases on
people who make
more than $250,000 a year.
I'm not going to be able to do
very much for
people who make less than that.
I'm not going to cut their taxes
much, but
I'm also not going to raise
them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What would you to
do that,
Neil?
And we should say that whatever
candidates
say during a campaign is not
always necessarily
what they can get passed once
they're elected.
NEIL IRWIN: That's always true.
There is also some stuff on
child tax credits.
Hillary Clinton talks about it
as a credit
that would help a lot of
middle-class, lower-income
families afford child care.
Donald Trump wants to do it as a
deduction.
That would mainly apply to the
wealthiest
Americans, upper-middle-class
families.
So, that's another key
distinction in this.
DAVID WESSEL: We should mention
that they
both talk about college and
student loans
in different forms.
Hillary is talking about making
college debt-free.
And so that would obviously be
things that
are targeted to the middle
class.
But I think Hillary Clinton is
also saying,
look, I want to spend a lot of
money on pre-K
and infrastructure, and that
will help people
get jobs and higher wages.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, there is a
whole lot
to look at with their economic
plans.
This has taken a big bite out of
it.
And we thank you both, Neil
Irwin, David Wessel.
DAVID WESSEL: You're welcome.
GWEN IFILL: As the summer's
political and
foreign policy debate has
focused overwhelmingly
on the rise of ISIS, an old foe
continues
to threaten lives and security
in Afghanistan.
The Taliban have been closing in
on Lashkar
Gah, the capital of Helmand
Province, forcing
residents to flee as the Afghan
army struggles
to contain them.
For more on this, I'm joined now
from Kabul
by special correspondent
Jennifer Glasse.
Jennifer, welcome.
You have been to Lashkar Gah, to
the provincial
capital.
Tell us, what is important about
that and
what is happening there?
JENNIFER GLASSE: Well, the
people down there
are very concerned.
The Taliban in the last week or
so have basically
encircled the city, taken many
of the road
leading into and out of the
town.
They say they feel besieged;
30,000 people
have been displaced just in the
last couple
of weeks alone, and the Afghan
army is struggling
to contain the Taliban and to
keep them out
of the provincial capital.
Now, if the Taliban were to
assault provincial
capital, it would be the first
time they have
tried it since 2008.
That assault was beaten back.
But, of course, it's been a
difficult time
for them.
They have some help down there.
Afghan forces have sent down
reinforcements.
They have help in the form of
American airstrikes.
U.S. officials say there have
been at least
25 U.S. airstrikes in the past
two weeks alone
as the Taliban have mounted that
offensive.
Probably the biggest problem is
that they
are controlling many of the
routes in and
out of the city, including the
main road between
Lashkar Gah and Kandahar, the
two big cities
in Southern Afghanistan.
This -- of course, Helmand has
always been
a contested province.
The fighting down there has been
particularly
fierce.
More than 125 U.S. soldiers have
lost their
lives there, including one
soldier who died
in January in fighting in
Helmand Province.
About 400 British soldiers, as
well as another
100 or so coalition forces have
died during
the conflict in Helmand
Province.
So, it has always been a heavily
contested
province, but the fact that the
Taliban are
making an offensive, making
advances on the
provincial capital, I think,
shows that they
are resurgent here, Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: What effect have
those -- you
talked about the U.S.
airstrikes, the 25 U.S.
airstrikes.
What visible effect have they
had?
JENNIFER GLASSE: Well,
certainly, they have
helped move the Taliban back or
keep the Taliban
from forming in big groups,
because that's
what we have seen since the
drawdown of U.S.
forces, since the withdrawal of
NATO forces,
the end of 2014.
Without that airpower, the
Taliban were able
to group in large numbers.
And that's what the airstrikes
are helping.
Now, U.S. officials also say
there are combat
enablers on the ground in
Lashkar Gah, in
Helmand Province.
Now, that could mean forces on
the ground,
fighting forces on the ground.
That could also mean spotters
who help target
those airstrikes more
effectively.
There are also several hundred
American advisers
that went down there last year
to help reform
the 215 Army Corps that is in
Lashkar Gah,
that is in Helmand Province,
trying to hold
that province together, helping
with, main
role, training, advising and
assisting the
Afghan forces.
But the Afghan force is clearly
struggling.
GWEN IFILL: Why are the Afghan
forces, why
do they appear to be so weak,
after all of
the support they have gotten,
not only from
the U.S., but also in training
and advising?
What has gone wrong, if
anything?
JENNIFER GLASSE: Well, there are
a number
of problems.
A lot of it is inexperience.
It is still a relatively new
force.
U.S. officials say they are
better this year
than they were last year because
they have
some combat experience.
They have a little bit of better
strategic
experience.
But there have been American
advisers down
there helping with the force.
Problems with leadership.
Many of the generals and
officials down there
have been changed or moved out.
Problems with strategy.
So, one of the things that the
Afghans used
to do was go and set up
checkpoints on roads.
They, of course, were easy
targets for the
Taliban.
What the U.S. forces and other
NATO advisers
are trying to help them with is
to actually
go and take land that they need
to take, hold
land that they need to hold.
But it's definitely been a
struggle in the
last week or so around Lashkar
Gah, as the
Taliban have made a concerted
offensive there,
in some cases even blowing up
bridges.
So, the Afghan security forces
-- also with
a fledgling air force.
So, they don't have their own
airpower.
And that's why the U.S. has
introduced its
airpower.
GWEN IFILL: And the Taliban, how
strong is
it?
We went through this back and
forth in Kunduz
not long ago.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Well, it's not
really whether
at this point Lashkar Gah falls
or not.
It really is the psychological
battle.
So, last week, the Taliban went
into a district
south of Lashkar Gah, in the
Helmand River,
went into the district center
for a brief
point of time.
And then the enemy army pushed
them back.
It's really not whether they can
hold the
area, because in Kunduz in the
north, they
only held the city center for
about three
days.
But the knock-on effect of that
was really
very dramatic, because it
instilled fear in
people.
They did go around.
They gathered a lot of
intelligence.
They gathered people's names in
Kunduz.
And the concern, of course, of
the people
in Lashkar Gah, if they are able
to get into
the city, are able to get close
as they have
gotten, it just shows that they
still are
a resurgent Taliban.
And people are very concerned,
not just in
Helmand Province, but around the
country,
that the Taliban have been able
to make such
gains.
GWEN IFILL: Jennifer Glasse
reporting for
us tonight from Kabul, thank you
so much.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Good to talk to
you, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": how
New York
City's High Line changed the way
we think
about parks; virus hunters
tasked with tracking
down the next outbreak before it
happens;
and a filmmaker and poet making
her Olympic
debut.
But, first: One question looming
over this
election is, what is the best
way to boost
the economy?
This week, the government
reported worker
productivity, which can affect
wages and growth,
declined for the third straight
quarter, the
longest slide since the late
'70s.
Some economists are asking if
slower growth
is the new normal.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman has been
exploring that question.
Here's a second look.
It's part of our series on
Making Sense of
financial news, which airs
Thursday.
PAUL SOLMAN: President Obama's
last of State
of the Union featured this proud
proclamation:
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Anyone claiming that America's
economy is
in decline is peddling fiction.
PAUL SOLMAN: But really?
Tell that to eminent economist
Robert Gordon,
a Democrat, who's peddling a
distinctly nonfictional
new book, "The Rise and Fall of
American Growth."
ROBERT GORDON, Author, "The Rise
and Fall
of American Growth": Did you
know that the
cable car dates back to 1870,
the beginning
of what I call the special
century, when life
was revolutionized in the United
States?
PAUL SOLMAN: A century that
ended in 1970,
46 years ago.
Gordon's thesis that slower
growth is the
new normal in the U.S. has
sparked a major
debate in economics the past few
years.
His book was a hot topic at this
year's meeting
of the American Economic
Association in San
Francisco.
BOB SHILLER, Nobel Laureate:
It's what you
call a magnum opus.
PAUL SOLMAN: That's Nobel
laureate Bob Shiller,
this year's president of the
group, who organized
a session on the new book and
chaired it himself
to spotlight Gordon and his
special century
thesis.
ROBERT GORDON: A century that
freed households
from an unremitting daily grind
of gainful
manual labor, household
drudgery, darkness,
isolation and early death.
PAUL SOLMAN: There seems little
dispute in
economics these days that 1870
to 1970 was
technologically special.
WOMAN: No one who hasn't cooked
over a wood
stove by the light of a kerosene
lamp can
really appreciate what it all
means.
PAUL SOLMAN: So it was an
amazing century,
right?
ERIK BRYNJOLFSSON, Massachusetts
Institute
of Technology: It was an amazing
century.
We took so much muscle power,
things that
used to be done by horses or by
humans, and
replaced it with machines.
PAUL SOLMAN: But MIT's Erik
Brynjolfsson doesn't
buy the argument that the U.S.
economy's best
days are over.
ERIK BRYNJOLFSSON: We're now
just in the early
stages of what we sometimes call
a second
machine age, where we're
beginning to do the
same things for brainpower,
things like artificial
intelligence, computers and big
data.
And I think we're going to see a
productivity
wave the likes of which we have
never seen
before.
ROBERT GORDON: It's just a hope
that Erik
has that these new inventions of
robots and
artificial intelligence are
going to change
the world on a par with
electricity and the
internal combustion engine.
Just think of the benefits of
getting rid
of the urban horse.
Think of all the horse droppings
all over
the street that we no longer
have to think
about and clean up.
PAUL SOLMAN: To counter those
who consider
his cavalier dismissal of high
technology
so much, well, horse manure,
Gordon took us
on an intimate show-and-tell.
ROBERT GORDON: Look at a few of
the things
that were invented in the
special century
after 1870, starting with the
electric light,
the greatest invention of all.
And now let's look at two of the
great inventions
of all time.
First, we have running water,
which eliminated
the need to carry water into the
house in
pails.
And then we have the flush
toilet, which eliminated
the need to go outside into the
bitter cold
to an outhouse.
And here we have a double
invention, central
heating and air conditioning.
We have the telephone invented
in 1876.
We have the television set,
partly invented
here in San Francisco by
Philosophy Farnsworth,
and then look what we have
hidden down here,
a refrigerator, which eliminated
the contamination
of food.
And here we have the Golden Gate
Bridge, an
example of the tremendous
investment in infrastructure
that made our economy grow so
fast in the
middle of the 20th century.
This bridge was finished in
1937.
NARRATOR: The Golden Gate is
bridged.
PAUL SOLMAN: Put them all
together, says Gordon,
and there's been no comparable
stretch of
economic growth before or since.
ROBERT GORDON: Here is the basic
point of
my book.
The early 20th century, the
middle of the
20th century between 1920 and
1970, and all
the years since then, and the
role of innovation
and technology is that black
area at the bottom.
And when we highlight it we see
that in the
middle of the 20th century, we
were growing
three times faster than we have
been in the
last 40 years.
PAUL SOLMAN: And not only were
the really
big inventions already on the
market by 1970.
This footage of the 1962 Seattle
World's Fair
suggests the ones we consider
big today were
already in the works.
NARRATOR: One day, you may be
able to call
home and automatically turn off
the oven or,
from a public telephone, water
the lawn during
that dry spell when you are many
miles away
on vacation.
Sounds fantastic, doesn't it?
PAUL SOLMAN: Critics like
Brynjolfsson don't
dispute the wonders of the past.
They just think we haven't seen
anything yet.
ERIK BRYNJOLFSSON: It's been
said that the
greatest failing of the human
mind is the
inability to understand the
exponential function.
And that's especially true in
the computer
era, where computer power
doubles about every
24 months or so.
PAUL SOLMAN: Exponential growth
like 2-4-8-16
and so on.
ERIK BRYNJOLFSSON: What that
does is, it leads
us to overestimate what's going
to happen
in the short run, because at
first it's happening
fairly slowly, but then we
underestimate what
happens in the long run, when
things really
take off.
PAUL SOLMAN: Bob Gordon scoffs.
ROBERT GORDON: But computers
have been riding
this exponential wave for the
last 50 years,
and it's not shown up in
productivity.
PAUL SOLMAN: In measured GDP
output per unit
of labor, that is.
ROBERT GORDON: We have gone from
the mainframe
to the personal computer to the
smartphone,
and only in the late 1990s did
we see a revival
of productivity growth of the
kind of magnitude
to match the great old days of
electricity
and the invention of the
motorcar and the
airplane.
PAUL SOLMAN: Productivity, says
Gordon, has
slowed to a crawl for years now,
what's called
long-term or secular stagnation.
ERIK BRYNJOLFSSON: The last time
people were
talking a lot about stagnation
was in the
1930s.
And guess what?
The next couple of decades were
the best decades
ever for economic growth.
PAUL SOLMAN: Admittedly,
Americans have been
techno-overoptimists before.
ACTOR: The 9000 series is the
most reliable
computer ever made.
We are all foolproof and
incapable of error.
PAUL SOLMAN: The year 2001 came
and went without
any manned space odysseys of
note.
ACTOR: Open the pod bay doors,
Hal.
PAUL SOLMAN: Much less ones with
the likes
of artificially intelligent Hal.
ACTOR: I'm sorry, Dave.
I'm afraid I can't do that.
PAUL SOLMAN: But most striking
to us is the
near-universal agreement about
the headwinds
now facing U.S. economic growth:
problems
in education, an aging
population, a huge
national debt, and, most of all,
growing inequality.
Economic historian Greg Clark
said he's long
been a techno-optimist.
But after reading Gordon's book:
GREGORY CLARK, Economic
Historian, University
of California, Davis: I am
actually convinced
now that the best of America is
behind us
in terms of economic growth.
PAUL SOLMAN: Clark titled his
talk "Winter
Is Coming," a nod to the grim TV
series about
a more primitive time, HBO's
"Game of Thrones."
GREGORY CLARK: I titled it that
way because
I was struck, when I looked at
the future
of the U.S. economy, how much it
was going
to resemble the medieval
economy.
PAUL SOLMAN: The medieval
economy?
GREGORY CLARK: The medieval
economy, in terms
of the types of jobs that people
now are doing,
gardening, food preparing,
serving, cleaning,
bricklaying, carpentry.
You could get someone from 1400,
put them
on the job and in two hours,
they'd be perfectly
functional.
PAUL SOLMAN: Working, that is,
but hardly
getting by.
And to Robert Gordon, the
connection between
stagnant wages and today's
political unease
is obvious.
ROBERT GORDON: Because the heart
of slow wage
growth is slow productivity
growth.
And added to that is the
inequality that is
siphoning off the little
productivity that
we have got into the top 1
percent.
And so the bottom 99 percent
have good reason
to be resentful and anxious.
PAUL SOLMAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," this
is economics correspondent Paul
Solman, reporting
from San Francisco.
GWEN IFILL: Next: As we have
seen with recent
pandemics, emerging diseases
like Zika and
Ebola can cross continents and
oceans with
uncontrolled speed.
Scientists are identifying areas
where new
infectious diseases are most
likely to emerge,
where there are high risks of
animal viruses
passing to humans.
One of those areas is Southern
China.
Hari Sreenivasan brings us this
report, which
was produced in collaboration
with Global
Health Frontiers.
DR.
PETER DASZAK, President,
EcoHealth Alliance:
We're in Guilin in Southern
China, in one
of the most beautiful parts of
China with
these amazing limestone hills
and valleys
and very scenic and picturesque.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Peter Daszak
is the president
of EcoHealth Alliance, a
nonprofit organization
based in New York dedicated to
protecting
wildlife and public health from
the emergence
of disease.
DR.
PETER DASZAK: The reason we're
here is, we're
interested in the risk of new
diseases emerging
out of the wildlife trade in
China, just like
SARS did a few years ago and
just like ultimately
HIV did in Africa 40-odd years
ago.
If we can get to the source of
where they
come from and reduce the risk,
we could solve
a huge problem and save millions
of lives,
rather than waiting for them to
emerge and
try to mop it up afterwards.
HARI SREENIVASAN: At markets
across China,
like this one, people come in
daily to buy
chickens and ducks.
DR.
PETER DASZAK: It increases the
risk of a pathogen
like avian flu from spreading,
because you
have got live chickens.
If one of them is infected, it
brings the
virus in, and it spreads to this
flock over
a few hours, and then those
animals are taken
to all distant parts of the
region.
Now, you could see this activity
anywhere
in the world.
This is just like what happens
in rural America
and rural parts of Europe.
But the difference is, here,
we're in a hot
zone for emerging diseases.
This is a place where we have
repeatedly seen
outbreaks from poultry moving
into people
and spreading globally.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Natural
habitats can also
contribute to the spread of
viruses.
DR.
PETER DASZAK: We have got people
fishing in
the river.
We have got people washing in
We know there is sewage coming
directly from
the houses into the river.
There is not much wildlife here,
but wild
ducks will come down to this
river as well
and mix in and migrate with the
viruses and
spread them backwards and
forwards into this
mix.
It's a big mixing vessel for
pathogens.
HARI SREENIVASAN: At a goose
farm, Daszak
and his team are looking for
signs of avian
flu.
DR.
PETER DASZAK: The idea is that,
if we can
catch the viruses they carry
here, we can
prevent them going to market and
potentially
spreading
the disease.
OK, ready.
We take swabs from the mouth,
and we take
cloacal swabs.
We put them in viral transport
medium and
then ship them in liquid
nitrogen to the lab
for testing.
Avian flu is a virus that's
common in many
types of birds.
But especially in poultry and
waterfowl, it's
a real killer.
And some of these strains can
also jump directly
into people.
So that's the problem.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Viruses that
can cross over
and infect humans have led to
previous pandemics,
including the most devastating
in recorded
world history, the 1918 flu,
which killed
more people than the First World
War, more
than 500 million infected
worldwide, and as
many as 100 million deaths over
a two-year
period.
DR.
PETER DASZAK: We're trying to
say, where is
the next avian flu going to come
from?
Can we see it before it becomes
a pandemic
problem and stop it?
There you go.
I look at this a little bit like
earthquakes.
We know earthquakes can be
devastating.
We know they're pretty rare, and
we know where
they happen.
So, this is the same for
pandemics.
We know that this is a hot spot
for pandemics.
We know why it happens, but what
we're not
doing with pandemics that we are
doing with
earthquakes is reducing the
damage initially.
This has been going on for 5,000
years.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Working with
EcoHealth Alliance
in this part of China is field
operations
manager Dr. Guangjian Zhu, a
biologist trained
in the ecology of bats, which
are known to
be the source of the SARS virus.
DR.
GUANGJIAN ZHU, Field Operations
Manager: It's
really urgent to teach people
how to deal
with the virus and just change
our normal
behavior to decrease the risk of
virus transfer.
DR.
PETER DASZAK: This is a big
tourist cave.
Shall we go?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Daszak is
concerned about
a bat cave that is a popular
tourist destination.
DR.
PETER DASZAK: You have got the
Rhinolophus
horseshoe bats right here in
this cave with
all these tourists going
through.
DR.
GUANGJIAN ZHU: Yes.
PETER DASZAK: Yes.
The bats here in this cave are
the same bats
that carry SARS virus.
Bats live in the cave all day
long, because
they're nocturnal.
And when they're up there, they
urinate and
defecate, right on top of the
tourists that
are walking through.
And all you have got to do is be
that one
person to breathe in at the
wrong time, and
suddenly you have been infected
with a virus
that is not only potentially
lethal to people.
It could cause a future
pandemic.
We sent you the samples from
these bats.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Daszak and his
team have
used mathematical models to try
to understand
what is driving these diseases.
DR.
PETER DASZAK: We went back to
every known
example of emerging disease,
HIV, Ebola, West
Nile virus, SARS, plotted where
it originated.
And we said, what are the things
that are
going on in those places?
The two big drivers are growing
human populations,
land use change, and high
wildlife diversity.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Rapid global
response to
disease outbreaks is essential
to stopping
transmission and saving lives.
But Daszak and his team of virus
hunters believe
that forecasting where outbreaks
are most
likely to occur is a critical
part of a defensive
strategy needed to prevent
outbreaks before
they emerge.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
GWEN IFILL: It's now a must for
visitors to
New York City, taking a walk
above far above
the madding crowd in a new kind
of urban park.
Jeffrey Brown took that walk
with the man
who helped create it.
JAMES CORNER, Landscape
Architect: This is
one of my favorite moments.
This is where these tracks
crisscross.
It's called a frog.
JEFFREY BROWN: Railroad tracks
of old in a
park that has helped changed
contemporary
thinking about cities and public
spaces.
JAMES CORNER: We amplify found
conditions.
JEFFREY BROWN: Recently, I
visited New York's
phenomenally successful High
Line Park with
its designer, landscape
architect James Corner.
JAMES CORNER: I think this is
what a lot of
people like.
They see this.
They have discovered a found
object.
There's a sense of surprise, a
sense of delight.
It's real and authentic.
It's not Disney.
JEFFREY BROWN: And it really is
real.
JAMES CORNER: And people get a
kick out of
it, especially in the context of
modern-day
Manhattan.
JEFFREY BROWN: The original
railway tracks,
30 feet above street level, were
built in
the 1930s.
Trains carried meat, milk and
other cargo,
sometimes making deliveries
direct to Manhattan
companies.
After trains stopped running
here -- the last
was in 1980 -- the site wasted
away, an eyesore
that no one could figure out
what to do with,
until they did: Create a new
kind of public
park.
Since its opening in 2009, the
High Line has
attracted millions of visitors
and plenty
of attention from other cities
eager to recreate
its magic.
James Corner's firm, James
Corner Field Operations,
worked on the High Line with
architects Diller
Scofidio and Renfro and famed
Dutch garden
designer Piet Oudolf.
JAMES CORNER: It was a huge
effort and a big
leap of faith, because the High
Line was really
perceived by a lot of people to
be a liability,
derelict, abandoned, dangerous,
dark, drugs,
crime.
JEFFREY BROWN: So inviting.
JAMES CORNER: Nothing good,
nothing good.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
Yes.
What do you think has been the
key to its
success?
JAMES CORNER: When you came onto
the High
Line, because the trains had
stopped running
and natural seeds had taken
root, it was a
beautifully surprising and
delightful one-and-a-half-mile
ribbon of green.
So you had this green carpet in
silence, a
sort of strange, haunting
quality to it.
We believed that if we were to
simply leverage
that, make it more of a garden
than it was
then, allow for the kind of
voyeurism and
the exhibitionism that occurs on
an elevated
structure when you can peek into
openings
and streets and buildings, that
there would
be something very charming about
that.
JEFFREY BROWN: More of a garden.
So, the High Line features an
astonishing
assortment of plantings that
give a sense
of nature thriving, even taking
over in the
midst of the city, and the
voyeurism or exhibitionism
of walking on a raised platform.
It's all about the views across
the city,
and into buildings, and about
watching and
seeing your fellow human beings
up close.
JAMES CORNER: It affects
people's psyche.
It affects their imagination.
It affects how they relate to
other people.
And it just charges up the
positive energy
about what it means to live in a
city.
In a sense, they're
theatricalizing everyday
life.
You can promote a new kind of
civic, public
value that I think is very
important.
JEFFREY BROWN: Theatricalizing?
Dramatizing?
JAMES CORNER: Dramatizing?
JEFFREY BROWN: You mean it's not
just a beautiful
space; it's almost like a
theater?
JAMES CORNER: Exactly.
And this is a bit of a balcony
or a catwalk,
if you will, where they can show
off too.
So, the interaction of people
who want to
be quiet and recessive and look
from a hidden
spot, vs. people who want to be
sitting out
front and center and be part of
the show,
there's a theatricality to that.
MAN: It's kind of cool.
JEFFREY BROWN: Part of the
theater on this
day included a sculpture called
The Sleepwalker
by Tony Matelli.
JAMES CORNER: This is public
art, and...
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes,
irresistible.
JAMES CORNER: Irresistible.
It's kind of -- he's
sleepwalking.
JEFFREY BROWN: But is he going
to wink at
us?
JAMES CORNER: He might do, if
you stare at
him long enough.
JEFFREY BROWN: Corner grew up in
Manchester,
England.
He's lived and worked in the
U.S. since the
1980s.
He and his firm are now in great
demand, designing
public spaces for cities around
the country,
Seattle's Waterfront, San
Francisco's Presidio,
a huge park in Memphis, and much
more, including
Cleveland's brand-new Public
Square, which
served as a protest site during
the recent
Republican Convention.
JAMES CORNER: In the '70s and
'80s, we spoke
about a flight to the suburbs.
People were leaving the city to
live in more
or less detached homes with
gardens and greenery.
Those same people are now coming
back to the
city, and there's now, in a
sense, a flight
to the city.
People want the cosmopolitanism,
the diversity,
the exposure, the amenities that
a city provides.
They want restaurants and cafes
and theaters
and museums, and parks and
public spaces.
JEFFREY BROWN: If anything, the
High Line
may be a victim of its own
success.
It can be clogged with people,
and property
values around it have
skyrocketed, pushing
all but the rich, individuals
and companies,
further away.
Still, James Corner sees a huge
benefit in
creating spaces for people of
all walks of
life to gather.
JAMES CORNER: We're social
animals, and we
want to have a place to live,
and we want
to have a place to work, but we
also want
to have a place to participate
with other
people.
And I believe it is now, perhaps
more than
ever, more fundamental to what
it means to
be a democracy to be able to
foster greater
understanding, greater
tolerance, understand
what it means to live in diverse
communities,
and to embrace that as something
enriching
and positive.
JEFFREY BROWN: The High Line
itself continues
to expand, with construction of
a so-called
spur, a block-long offshoot,
starting in 2017.
Thirty feet above the streets of
Manhattan,
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: Now: a poet and a
filmmaker who
also happens to be an Olympic
runner in Rio.
GWEN IFILL: Now: a poet and a
filmmaker who
also happens to be an Olympic
runner in Rio.
She will be competing tomorrow.
And, as you will see, there are
a number of
connections for her between the
way she writes
and the way she runs.
ALEXI PAPPAS, Olympic Athlete:
My name is
Alexi Pappas.
And I'm a professional
long-distance runner
with Nike.
And I'm also a filmmaker,
actress and poet.
This summer, I will race in my
first Olympic
Games in the 10,000 meters on
the track.
I will be running for Team
Greece.
I'm a duel citizen and decided
to compete
for Team Greece because I can
compete at the
highest level, but I can also
reach a young
generation of girls who don't
necessarily
have the long-distance role
models that we
are lucky enough to have in the
United States.
So, I'm very excited.
I think I was a more serious
poet before I
was a serious runner.
What I find with writing that is
so special,
and in poetry in particular, is,
there's such
an economy of words.
And I like having absolute
freedom within
boundaries.
And in running, similarly, there
are these
limitations.
So, in a race, you might have a
certain lane
that you have to stay in or a
certain number
of laps or a course.
But within those boundaries,
there's so much
room for freedom and creativity
and personality.
"Breaking Tape."
"It happened like I imagine it
would feel
to throw open big double doors,
the kind from
a mansion or dollhouse.
I looked maybe like a very
strong princess
charging through the gate
towards the castle
I built myself."
"Tracktown" is a film that we
have just made
and premiered and is inspired by
my observations
and experiences as an elite
runner in Eugene,
Oregon.
And when I moved to Eugene to
run a fifth
year with the Oregon Ducks after
I graduated
Dartmouth, I found that the town
and the community
embraced running in a way that I
had never
seen before.
WOMAN: "A goal is a dream with a
deadline"
-- Napoleon Hill.
ALEXI PAPPAS: As a storyteller,
I want to
tell stories that I uniquely can
tell and
stories in highly specific
worlds that most
people don't get the chance to
see.
And so "Tracktown" is set in the
running world,
but is really about this girl,
and what is
her life like on the track, but
especially
off the track.
The Olympics have been on my
mind since my
dad brought my brother and me to
the 1996
Olympics in Atlanta.
I wanted to experience something
at the highest
level.
And being there, you're among,
like, greatness,
like great minds and great
bodies.
In terms of being nervous about
what people
are concerned about in Rio, it's
not the first
thing on my mind.
And I think a lot of athletes
will agree that
we have worked for more than
four years for
this dream, for our whole lives.
And nothing can stop most of us
from going
and realizing that dream.
"Scary Things."
"The thing about scary things,
like spiders,
is that they do not scare me
nearly as much
as the things I want the most
things."
The things you're scared of, I
think, is a
reflection of how I feel every
day.
Like, as a runner and a
filmmaker, I wake
up every single day a little bit
nervous,
but in a good way.
There's always a goal that I
always have,
maybe a goal for that day or a
goal for longer-term,
an Olympic dream.
It's admitting that these
pursuits are really
hard, but they're really
beautiful.
And I hope I always have
something that I
wake up being like a little bit
scared and
very excited for.
GWEN IFILL: You can read more
about Alexi
Pappas and hear her read more of
her poems
on our Web site at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening with David Brooks and
E.J. Dionne.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.